# Butterworth Filter Design

## Problem Statement:
Noise is all around us and more often than not, noise interferes with the some of the beautiful sounds that we are trying to listen to and perhaps even record. Therefore, it is often desirable to be able to extract the unwanted sounds (noise) from the ones that we are interested in. Now, as complex as sound filtering and processing may seem, the two were made easy all thanks to some of the modern tools and software available to us. With that said, in order to be able to take advantage of these tools, one needs to have a good understanding of the ins and outs as well as the caveats of sound filtering, sampling, and processing both on theoretical and practical levels. Therefore, the purpose of this project is to allow myself to learn some of the common analysis and design techniques to solving two of the most practical filter design problems, designing lowpass and highpass filters. 

## Objectives:
The main objectives of this project were to take a deep dive into some of the common analysis and design techniques to solving two practical filter design problems as well as improve my theoretical and practical understanding of some of the concepts related to signals and systems sych as: Fourier Transforms, Filtering, and Sampling. To ensure the previously mentioned objectives are achieved, I decided to use MATLAB to design two types of Butterworth filters: a lowpass Butterworth filter and a highpass Butterworth filter. The lowpass Butterworth filter was used to eliminate the sound of a utility vehicle’s backup beeper from that of a great horned owl’s hoots whereas the highpass Butterworth filter was used to eliminate the sound of a flying jet from that of a number of birds chirping. With that said, the main challenge I set for myself was to design filters that are able to, effectively, eliminate the unwanted noise from the beautiful sounds of nature while still maintaining a minimal order.

## Technique and Aproach:
### 1. Lowpass Filter Design:
For the purpose of this part of the project, I concluded that I had to design and implement a lowpass Butterworth filter in order to eliminate the high frequency “annoying sound of a backup beeper of a utility vehicle” from the beautiful hoots of a great horned owl. In order to accomplish this, I carried out the following procedure. First, I went ahead and used MATLAB’s audioread() function in order to read the unfiltered owl sound file. Byy doing so, I was able to store the sampled data in a variable named y as well as store the sampling rate of this data in another variable named Fs. Once I had extracted the data I needed from the sound file, I went ahead and used MATLAB’s play() function in order to play the unfiltered owl sound as to have a basis of comparison between the unfiltered and filtered sounds of the owl. After playing the unfiltered sound signal, I needed to find a way to compute its discrete Fourier transform in order to plot the single-sided magnitude spectrum of this unfiltered signal. To accomplish this, I used MATLAB’s fft() function, which calculates the discrete Fourier transform of an input signal using a fast Fourier transform, as well as the plot() function in order to display the resulting Fourier representation. The resulting single-sided magnitude spectrum plot can be found in the "Lowpass Filter Design" portion of the "Measurements and Results" section of this README file. With that said, the single-sided magnitude spectrum of the unfiltered owl sound signal did not prove all that helpful as the interfering signal components are time varying. To get around that, I went ahead and used MATLAB’s spectrogram() function in order to construct a spectrogram depicting the Fourier Transform of the unfiltered owl sound signal over time. The resulting spectrogram can be found in the "Lowpass Filter Design" portion of the "Measurements and Results" section of this README file. After obtaining the unfiltered owl sound signal’s spectrogram, I had a pretty clear idea as to what the cutoff frequency of the Butterworth filter should be as well as the range of numbers from which the Butterworth filter’s order should be chosen. Upon inspection of the spectrogram, I noticed that the owl’s hoots have a frequency as high as 300Hz and therefore, all frequencies beyond 300Hz are to be eliminated (filtered out) hence why I chose my cutoff frequency (Fc) to be 300Hz. Furthermore, I started out by setting the order of the Butterworth filter at 3 (third order filter) however, the sound quality of the hoots was not all that great and I was still able to hear some echoing of the backup beeper happening in the background. For that reason, I decided to increase the order of my Butterworth filter to 5 (fifth order) which seemed to eliminate any background echoing of the backup beeper. With that said, the hoots of the owl were quieter than they should have been and for that reason I decided to, yet again, increase the order of the Butterworth filter in an attempt to make the hoots of the owl a little louder and easier to hear. While experimenting with that, I was able to conclude that the best sound quality for the owl hoots occurred when the order of the Butterworth filter was at 7 (seventh order) or 8 (eighth order). With that said, to make my final decision on what the order of the Butterworth filter should be, I kept changing the order of the Butterworth filter back and forth between 7 and 8, all while listening closely to the owl hoots, in an attempt to see if there are any noticeable differences between the two. After conducting that experiment, I was unable to hear and or detect any noticeable differences in the quality of the sound of the owl hoots.


### 2. Highpass Filter Design:
  
## Measurements and Results:
  ### 1. Lowpass Filter Design:
  
  ### 2. Highpass Filter Design:

## Concluding Remarks:
In conclusion, my results turned out to be in line with the objectives I have set forth for myself for the purpose of this project. I was able to, completely, filter out the sound of a utility vehicle’s backup beeper from that of a great horned owl’s hoots using a 7th order lowpass Butterworth filter. Similarly, I was able to, completely, filter out the sound of a flying jet from the that of a group of birds chirping using an 8th order highpass Butterworth filter. Therefore, it is safe to claim that I was able to achieve the objective of eliminating the unwanted noises in the unfiltered sound files I have using the appropriate, minimal order Butterworth filters in addition to the signals and systems knowledge I have acquired throughout my education.  
